# README: PPOL 670 Final Project - Examining the Effectiveness and Future Prospects of the LIHTC Project

## Objective

The objective of this project is to examine the effectiveness and future prospects of the Low Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) program in the U.S. We analyze the LIHTC database using visualizations, perform geospatial analysis, and apply machine learning techniques to gain insights into LIHTC project characteristics, distribution, and impact.

## Files/Directories

index.qmd: This is the quarto document that contains the R code used to retrieve and analyze the data.
index.html: This directory contains the html output generated by the quarto document
README.md: This file provides an overview of the code and instructions for running the analysis.

## Data Documentation

There are 3 datasets that we used in this project, two of which are dc metro shape files that are used for geospatial analysis. The following are instructions to retrieve the datasets and replicate the research. 

### 1. LIHTC DATA
All LIHTC data are available through the interactive system for accessing the LIHTC Database at https://lihtc.huduser.gov/. Users may select variables of interest, retrieve data on all projects in a particular State or group of States, restrict the search to projects with a particular characteristic or set of characteristics, select only projects in a particular city or county, or all projects within a user-selected radius of the center of a city.

Alternatively, you can download the entire database. The file, LIHTCPUB.ZIP, is a ZIP archive file containing the following:

LIHTC Data Dictionary 2021.PDF	The data dictionary for the LIHTC database (multiple address data use same formats) in Adobe Acrobat.
LIHTCPUB.ACCDB	The LIHTC Database in MS Access format. This file also includes building addresses from HUD’s LIHTC tenant data collection.
LIHTCPUB.CSV	The LIHTC Database in CSV format.

Before loading, make sure you have the csv file named "LIHTCPUB.CSV" in your directory.

### 2. DC Metro Lines Dataset
Metro lines cropped to the District of Columbia boundary. Metro Lines for DC only. The dataset contains locations and attributes of Metro lines. Lines were taken from legacy data from WMATA and fit to orthophotography and extracted planimetric data.
Download the zip file called "Metro_Lines_in_DC" from this website: https://opendata.dc.gov/maps/DCGIS::metro-lines-in-dc-1/about. Unzip the files and put the 6 files in a folder called "dcmetro" in your directory.

### 2. DC Metro Stations Dataset
Metro stations within the District of Columbia boundary. The dataset contains locations and attributes of Metro statioins. Lines were taken from legacy data from WMATA and fit to orthophotography and extracted planimetric data.
Important: Download the zip file called "Metro_Lines_in_DC" (Yes, the file names are the same) from this website: https://opendata.dc.gov/datasets/DCGIS::metro-lines-in-dc-1/about?layer=52. Unzip the files and put the 6 files in a folder called "Metro_stations_in_DC". Then, put this folder into the "dcmetro" folder in your directory.

## Running the Code

To replicate the analysis, follow these steps:

1. Clone this repository to your local machine.
2. Open RStudio and set the working directory to the root of the cloned repository.
3. Open the assignment05 quarto document in the directory
4. Make sure you have installed all the necessary packages.
6. Run and render the entire quarto document
7. There will be visualizations and pulled data available for analysis in the environment.

## File Dependencies (packages)

library(tidyverse)
library(tigris)
library(tidyr)
library(readr)
library(stringr)
library(lubridate)
library(sf)
library(patchwork)
library(tidycensus)
library(httr)
library(jsonlite)
library(testthat)
library(tidymodels)
library(rpart)
library(themis)
library(parsnip)
library(caret)
library(rpart.plot)

## Repository Information
lease visit the project repository: [PPOL 670 Final Project Repository](https://github.com/yfang133/PPOL-670-Final-Project)

